Good morning.
I'm Cecilia Mawindu.
I'm a community mobilizer and assistant coordinator at
internews and I'm also a journalist.
So today I'm going to start with a story.
People love stories.
People relate to stories.
So there is a small village in the heart of East Africa.
Why did I choose East Africa?
I'm from East Africa, so yes.
And they are a group of journalists
and they are dedicated journalists.
And they want to do an investigative piece
about a certain river where bodies are damped every day
from different parts of their country.
But for them to do this, it being an investigative story,
they need to use safety tools.
They need to use encryption tools
because they are a group of 10 journalists
and of course they will be communicating with each other.
So they need to use safety tools like encryption tools.
For example, use of Mabel or they are going to use a tool
like bayonet whereby they are going to document and all that.
But unfortunately for them, that those tools are in languages
that they can't use.
So enter the hero of our story, localization.
So what is localization?
But before I go to localization,
let me run to the punchline.
Ki Swahili is spoken by 150 million
to 200 million people around the world.
Basically most of the people who speak Swahili
are concentrated in the African region,
especially the East African region from Burundi, Congo,
Rwanda, Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania.
So as I said, what is localization?
Localization is adopting a tool into languages
that into different languages
and localization is not just about translation.
It's to be able to translate that information
to fit the culture and the context of the community
or the language that you are translating for.
So what is the importance of localization in open source tools?
I go back to the story I was talking about.
These journalists can't be able to use this tool.
So chances are they might start doing the story
and along the way the information is intercepted
or they even put themselves in harm's way.
So localization is very important
because it makes it accessible to a wider audience.
One of the things under the sustain project
which is being run by internet is right now
and sustained stands for sustaining safety tools
with analytics, networking and insight.
We are talking about sustainability
and one of the things that has come out
among the six tools that we are dealing with,
they want to expand their user base.
But one of the key to expand their user base
is have them in languages where people can be able
to understand.
So when you localize these tools,
you give people an opportunity,
especially marginalized community,
you give them an opportunity to be able to use these tools
and also it's also a way of bringing in different end users
who can bring in different angles.
So what are the challenges of localization funding?
Of course, funding, funding, funding.
You know, we keep saying funding
and we sound like a broken record,
but I think we can't say it in any other way, funding.
So funding is an issue when it comes to localization
and also lack of enough volunteers.
There is an organization called Localization Lab
where they localize tools in different languages.
I was part of localization at some point
and I saw there were so many people who would volunteer
from different parts of the world.
But the other day I was speaking to Irene
who is in the room today and she was telling me about,
also there is the privilege of being a volunteer
because some people would want to volunteer,
but there's no time to do that, you know.
So lack of enough volunteers is also another issue.
And also something that has come up in localization
is there are some words which you can't translate
or localize into different languages.
For example, in Swahili.
When we localize some tools,
there are some words we just leave them like that.
So you find also the people you are localizing for,
that is one word, they look at the tool,
yes they understand what you're saying,
but there is a word that is not translated
and you find people wondering what does this mean?
So also that's another issue.
So what are the some success stories that have been there
when it comes to localization of tools in Swahili?
There are so many, there are several tools
that have been translated in Swahili.
There is a Swahili community.
Well, it's not as big as we would want it,
but it is there.
There is a Safe Sister Guide.
A Safe Sister Guide has been created by internews
and our program called Safe Sister,
I'm a product of Safe Sister.
Safe Sister is fellowship where they train women,
especially from the Sub-Saharan region
on the issue of digital safety.
They train us to be training TOTs,
we train people on digital safety.
So Safe Sister Guide has been translated in Swahili
and I can attest to it
because I know I've trained using Swahili.
One time I was training in my village
and it was such an easy thing
because we speak in Swahili in my village
and I could see the girls getting very excited
because now they could be able to understand
the thing on online safety
because now there was a guide in Swahili.
Then they spent America Online Harassment Manual
which we translated into Swahili in 2022
and I have seen, especially journalists from Zanzibar,
Tanzania use this harassment manual
because now it is in Swahili.
They have been able to contextualize
what is in the manual.
So there are so many success stories
but I picked these two
because I have trained using both of them
and I have seen how it has been able to have an impact.
So how do we get involved in localization?
There's so many opportunities
you can involve yourself in localization.
You can decide to be a volunteer.
If you're too busy, you can try to recruit someone
who has the time.
Also you can be able to provide feedback.
Feedback is like pulling teeth.
Getting feedback from people is so hard.
So when you can be able to get feedback from people,
help to get feedback, especially on these two.
For example, we have localized SafeSister Guide in Swahili.
Swahili is not standard.
You find the Swahili, the Tanzanian speak,
is not there, there is some difference.
The Swahili, the people from Congo speak is so different.
So how do we able to make that tool
that has been localized in Swahili
be able to be used in Congo, in Tanzania?
So as a person, if you're reading this document
and you see maybe there is a word that can be changed,
you can be able to provide feedback.
And then contributing to translation.
There are several translation tool.
The one we used to use at localization is called Transifx.
So you can also decide to be able to,
for example, also provide feedback on the translation tool.
And also if you can be able to connect these tools
with funders who can able to fund the localization,
that is one way of getting involved.
And also community.
So when we come in our tell,
the story we're talking about,
if they don't solve this problem,
then what happens to that story?
For example, if they're from an authoritarian regime,
as I said, they could be,
they could be attacked by the government
or the people who are doing whatever they are doing.
So how can we also rally our community
when it comes to the issue of localization?
Also, sometimes we localize tools
and define people are not using those tools.
So you will localize it in Swahili, it's not being used.
So also how can you put the information out there
and say, hey, this tool, Bayanat is in Swahili now.
You can be able to use it.
Bayanat does ABC, so community driven effort.
So when I'm coming to my conclusion,
so localization makes technology
and digital resources available,
not only in Swahili, but in different languages.
It empowers individual to participate
in the digital world that we are in today.
If there is anything COVID-19 underscored,
underscored is the importance of the digital world.
And then also they're able to access digital content
and we are able to bridge the digital divide.
Thank you so much.
I'll give this opportunity to anyone
who wants to ask a question.
Yes.
Thanks for that.
I'm new to the federal localization
that I'm in use for Swahili and we just started
saving dept.
For example, I think the app is now at least in Swahili.
But one of the things I've noticed,
so I know from German where you have people speak very
differently, but then there's a standard German,
so we'll accept the standard German.
But what I hear of Swahili is that there isn't,
well I mean you just said it basically,
but I've heard it also that there isn't just like,
except then, like government approved standards.
And from my experience the tools generally assume
there's like a clear, like this is the language
and you just follow that.
I'm wondering if there's anything you think that can
we represent something like Swahili better,
like this one, more continuum than a clear standard?
So, as I said, there's the online harassment manual
that we translated in 2022.
What we did, we had translators from Tanzania,
we had translators from the Congo,
we had translators from Kenya,
we are looking at the major regions where Swahili
is spoken.
So what we did is making sure that the people,
the localizers from Tanzania are able to localize,
and I know it's a lot of work, but we also said if we
don't do that, then we'll find also it's a preserve
of the few, maybe the Kenyans and a bit of the Tanzania.
So we got localizers from different language.
I can tell you right now, if I go to the manual
and I read the Congolese part, it's quite tricky
because I'm from Kenya,
this Swahili is quite a bit different,
but we also try to make it standard whereby even if you
don't understand it 100%, you can get the concept
of what it's talking about.
So that is one way we've tried to beat that.
Yes, yes, Mark.
So when you are working with different dialects like this,
do you find it's more effective to have each group
start from English or is it better to translate it,
say you start with Congolese Swahili and then you have
people from Kenya and Tanzania work off of that,
or did each group start with the manual in English
and independently translate it?
Yes, that's what we did from English.
And then now after that, you now sit down and look at it
and give feedback on it.
Because as I said, we didn't want it to come out
like so different, so somebody will be able to be confused.
Yes.
Yes, Kyle.
As a non-Swahili speaker and when working with
these resources and being able to pinpoint
what languages, different pieces of documentation
need to be translated into,
what is the best way to sort of support the community,
whose language and context we're trying to support
the translation of resources for,
as someone who wouldn't be able to necessarily assist
with the translation, what's the best way to support that?
I think just the best, because you are an non-Swahili speaker,
is getting reviews or feedback from the Swahili speakers,
that is the end users, and now the information
that you are able to collect depends on who you are,
you are sharing the information to maybe it could be developers,
maybe it could be finders.
You frame it in a way that you can be able to relay
the information as much as you can speak the language.
Yes.
So if there are no more questions, my time is up.
Yes, yes.
Well, I'm wondering if you consider doing separate
Swahili for congruence, like Swahili,
or somewhere else, or whether that,
and if so, why you couldn't have chose matter?
I repeat your question.
Yes, a big thought where,
like it's possible to say, okay,
we're gonna make the translation that's,
like technically possible to say,
this is Swahili from Congo,
this is Swahili from Kenya, this is one,
and then do separate Swahili translations.
So I'm wondering, is there something about the culture
of Swahili that means you wouldn't want to do that?
Like, if you'd rather have a kind of,
it sounds like you chose to make this standard,
is that the culture?
Okay, one of the things is also the resources,
because if we were to go like fully Congolese,
it would mean like having a separate,
so what we are trying to do is make it standard
so that any Swahili speaker can be able to understand it,
and also we don't want to be able to create too,
because you see now the issue of dialects,
especially in Africa, there's so many, you know,
even in Congo, you find there's Swahili being spoken
in Kinshasa, is different from another town.
So we didn't want to bring all those things,
because it would be like opening a Pandora's box.
So we try to make it in, yes.
So, yes.
Thank you.
I'm curious about how do you just collect feedback
from the Swahili language users?
Just what kind of mechanism or...
Okay, so one of the mechanisms that we do that
is also targeting people, like for example,
as I said, my hometown, we speak a lot of Swahili.
So targeting people directly,
also as a journalist, you are able to put information
out there, say I'm providing feedback for ABCD,
or when you are doing a training,
and you are doing a training in Swahili,
after you do the training,
you also get feedback from those people, yes.
So being targeted, yes.
So thank you so much.
The floor is yours.
Thank you.